Talking about the times of change and of achievement, Fred Benson was dean of engineering for a while.
Was engineering, under his leadership, also cooperative with oceanography and the geosciences?
I liked Fred Benson very much.
He was also an officer of the Research Foundation.
When it came to forming a new college,
I had proposed that geology be put in a new college, which meant taking it away from his.
So I talked to him about it, and he said, well, wherever it fits, it was easy going.
He had never gotten a PhD, as I recall, but he had an absolute key role, I think, in the Research Foundation and the School of Engineering.
He was a relatively low-profile type of person, but very friendly, very helpful.
Back in the early 60s, as A&M looked at what it might become, and out of that look to the future came a number of changes, co-education, voluntary core, racial integration, did you and your colleagues in the geosciences area have any opinions about those changes?
Well, the period I was here from 49 to 50,
69, a lot of those things happened.
It was just interesting to watch them.
I noticed particularly now, in those old days, we had no colors on the football team, and now it's a majority.
I wonder why we can't have a little more competition from some of the white fellows.
The girls coming, I think oceanography was very close
and meteorology particularly to attracting women in those eras.
But the Corps was awfully strong and awfully good, of course, for its purposes.
So there were very significant days, but it's just evolution, I guess.
Were you, did anyone ever attract, attempt to lure you away from here?
Hmm.
No, I mentioned I had a chance for the dean of the graduate school.
I also was offered the position of director of the research foundation.
And when Dr. Jackula passed away, I was made the executive associate director, I think, of the foundation.
And Dean Barlow was also an associate director.
He agreed that whatever I would decide as administrator, he'd go along with.
So I turned down both those offers, and I often wonder what would have happened if I'd accepted either one.
I just felt they were both too far removed from the actual subject matter.
And my greatest satisfaction has been from some of the subject matter things that I was later able to publish, I think.
As you look back on that whole period, who were the key faculty hires during your period of leadership?
Which faculty made the most difference?
Well, the only faculty that I really hired were the five original ones.
A lot of the rest came because they had some kind of a project that fitted in, could support themselves in part.
One exception to this was Walter Saussure, who was a meteorologist, and our teaching helped to point where we were able to justify one appointment for meteorology teaching.
I made a list of some of the key people.
I can't rattle those off.
Hugh McClellan is the one that I recall.
I had mentioned him and his role in the ship development, but I can quickly think up some others.
For example, Syed El Syed, who came here without university support, built an international program, George Huebner,
who was a graduate electrical engineering.
He started to work in the Gulf before I came, tracking hurricanes.
He'd been here all the way through.
Sammy Ray mentioned the building in Galveston, who built up the Galveston Marine Lab, the Galveston University section, became president of it.
He was a key hire.
And then some of the people are not here this time.
John Freeman was the first meteorologist.
We hired him on Oceanography Project, but he was really a full-time professional meteorologist.
That's when meteorology started.
Vance Moyer was head of the department for both during the...
He was head of the meteorology section in our department, and later he was head of the meteorology department in the new college.
He's a very key person.
Robert A. Clark was in hydrology, worked in radar meteorology, became the key officer in the National Weather Service in hydrology.
Those were some, then geological work, John Antoine and Arnold Balmer were key people who came.
Those are some of the ones that I would mention.
Worthnell, of course, was one of our graduates who became department head, became an associate dean, has great influence on the college.
If you could give the Texas A&M administration today advice, what advice would you give them about the authority of the chief administrator of a department?
Whether we call it a department head or a chairman, what authority do you think that person ought to have?
Well, I think it depends upon the job description they made for him and for the department and the statement of mission of the school that he's in.
Those things have to be tied to his own interests and hope they all make a good package.
All right.
Let's make believe then it's oceanography.
What would you have as the mission there?
Now, what is it you want me to say?
What would be the role of the department leader?
whether we call it department head or department chairman, what would you have that person responsibility to be?
Well, I'd say the key thing is to keep the curriculum going and to improve the teaching and doing that by utilizing research projects to provide equipment and provide opportunity for field work and data for theses and so on.
So it's the academic excellence, I guess, would be the way to summarize that.
How would you select that person?
Oh, boy.
Well, here again I would mention that there needs to be a mission in the department
and if the university knew what that mission was do they want to emphasize one area or another you have two choices one is to say well all departments are equal give a share of our support to each one equally or i think we can make a name in this field and let's let's put more of our emphasis on that area become known in that area and keep the other departments good but not
I don't know how you would word that, but you either have to have everything all the same, which usually tends toward mediocrity, or else you've got to choose something to prioritize and feature.
And I believe you're leaning toward the prioritize, aren't you?
Yes.
Would that also apply to colleges, that some departments in some colleges might get greater emphasis than others?
Yes, I think usually it applies.
However, there are some colleges which are so good around the whole area, all their departments kind of fit that one area of excellence, that's fine.
But in most colleges, they just cannot become fully acknowledged and recognized in all fields.
So they have to choose and put emphasis on certain ones.
How long should the department leader, and I'll call him department head from now on, how long should the department head serve?
Well, that's a very interesting question.
Some departments consider this as a chore.
I mean, the people consider it as a chore, and they're happy to get out of it after a couple years, which means that they...
usually did not have or develop a sense of direction while they were there.
There was not time to do this and to build.
An interesting comparison here, since I worked at the Naval Postgraduate School, the customer is to change superintendents who are an admiral and change maybe every four years or so.
Well, there's certain advantages to that and certain disadvantages.
Usually the Admiral comes in, he knows he has four years and he has to make a mark.
So he asks, how can I make a mark and do it in four years?
And that's not too good.
I guess it depends.
If you're starting a new department and if you can find the right head for it, then he should have a chance to lay out his ideas and build them over a period of time.
It does take time to accumulate the right faculty and get them fitted together.
In my case, I was head for 15 years, and that was a real great advantage from my point of view anyhow.
Should the department head feel bound by a majority vote of the department always?
I don't think you can be bound by the department vote.
They don't have the contacts that the head has.
Usually you just end up in confusion when you try to get a group decision.
What is the public responsibility of an academic department?
What should, in oceanography, does the department have almost some unwritten obligations of public service to the region?
I don't know whether it's an obligation, but I do think it's a good thing and almost a necessary thing.
The unfortunate thing is that a lot of these contacts want to be with the head of the department.
The ideal thing would be if every department member had some of the contacts, but I think back of the various things.
I was on the board of the hospital, on the board of the Barcrest Development, the board of the Presbyterian Church, just an innumerable bunch of community relationships, and it was very hard to do them well because so many, and yet I couldn't figure any way to turn them over to another person.
And you and the department also spent a great deal of time out of this county, out of this region, speaking to industry and to other public groups, I think, also.
Which was a good investment.
Oh, yes.
Promotional in a way.
But what I found is that, like the Dow Chemical Company, I spoke at their annual meeting once, and then the next year they wanted me to come back.
Well, giving a speech of that sort, what they expect is entertainment, really, as well as the knowledge.
They expect the same entertainment they would get if they paid somebody to
come in for $10,000 or something, and you can't compete.
You just can't do it.
A good speech requires real effort, and you can only do a certain amount of this.
I always found that talking to engineers was my most interesting thing.
Engineers seem to react in a way that general audiences don't quite.
depending on your subject matter, of course.
But everybody wants a program.
Every institution, every little organization has to have a monthly program.
and they go to great lengths to get them.
I mentioned Rotary Club.
I was in Rotary 40 years.
I went down to Houston to talk to Rotary Club, and they had their business meeting.
When they got through, there was five minutes left for my talk.
The opposite extreme, another talk, the Houston Central Rotary Club.
I'd come back from Russia.
I had a nice set of colored slides of Russia, and they knew I'd been in Russia.
So a talk was on that, and I went up to set up a slide projector, and they said, this is about 15 minutes before the program, they said, we can't show slides in here.
There are going to be 600 people, and they go way back into the woodwork there, can't show slides.
And what I did is pile the slides in a pile and use them for notes, and that talk went over better than any time ever.
But anyhow, people expect too much from a free traveling professor, let's say.
You can't do it.
You just can't.
Let's make believe that Texas A&M hired you as a consultant today about geosciences in general and particularly oceanographer.
What advice would you give them?
Well, the thing I see is I would suggest to get further into the national picture.
we get these professional magazines and you look at the different committees.
How many committees has a representative from Texas A&M?
And you look at the journals, how many in the year, how many articles are from Texas A&M?
And I think,
We might do a little better good.
The question here maybe relates to a university publication, Quarterdeck, which is an excellent publication put out by Oceanography.
There's a lot of effort required for that.
And I can't help but wonder, and I've talked to the chairman about this previously, if that effort doesn't detract from the effort to get into the open literature.
And if that effort is worthwhile, is the distribution list great enough?
And does it do enough good to justify the amount of effort that goes into it?
I know it's a beautiful publication, but it's all done here.
And the whole publication business and library business is up for grabs now.
Are there any newly emerging areas in oceanography that this department ought to take advantage of, ought to enter?
I don't know of any new ones.
There are a lot of old ones that have new aspects to them.
Nuclear waste disposal, for example, what to do about this.
Forecasting, that is where it gets tough.
And the forecast and the weather over the ocean, like the hurricanes.
Bill Gray at Colorado tries to forecast the number of hurricanes.
I wrote, there are four papers that I'm proud of, one of which is called the Hurricane Heat Potential of the Ocean.
And it turns out now they've found that that is a valuable way
of predicting or helping predict the intensity and the track of hurricanes.
And in the case of Hurricane Britt, which was just on the news a month ago,
What they said was that the heat potential of the Western Gulf is what made Brett grow so fast and grow so large.
And there's a group of four people now in the Weather Service in Miami who are continuing research on this study I turned out in 1976.
It had been kind of quiescent.
What it was, people have used the sea surface temperature to indicate the heat content.
Well, that's only the skin.
And what I said is, no, you have to use the three-dimensional volume of how much heat.
And that has not been done until just the last three or four years at Dallas.
I met this group of people who were finally finding that the total heat resource is what's important to hurricane development.
So that was a satisfying.
So I'd say forecasting.
It's an area where people are kind of worried about getting into it, and you get your neck chopped off pretty quickly, but that is where the need is.
And it's true in every aspect.
In the fisheries, what are the populations of various kinds of fish?
In the weather, what's the heat do to change the incoming weather on the coastlines?
In the geology, forecasting, well, beach erosion, for example, that's a terrific problem nowadays.
And we used to have an island down here that would grow on one end and erode on the other end.
You had to know what you're doing.
One of the first problems we ever had was down along the coast, is this land a part of Texas or is it part of the Gulf of Mexico?
And it depended on which way the wind was blowing.
So forecasting is an area of very great value and very difficult and very widespread.
As far as you know nationally, how is the oceanography and the geosciences in general
How are we rated here?
Are we in the top?
Texas A&M?
Yes, sir.
Well, the South has a little disadvantage.
Somehow the Northeast, a lot of people over there think that that's an isolated part of the country.
California is another specialized area.
California's thrown a lot of support into oceanography.
Hugh McClellan wrote a letter to the president in which he said he thought we were the third best in the country, almost certainly in the top five.
And I think that's true.
They've got a big series coming up where they're going to visit from campus to campus, and ours is one of the five campuses they're going to review for some kind of a major oceanographic overlook.
So you'd say that we certainly are in the top 10, unquestionably.
Oh, yes.
And perhaps in the top five.
The top five, that would be Woods Hole, Miami, and Scripps, University of Washington, and us.
Very good company.
Let's see, looking back on your years, what were your proudest moments as you now look back?
You felt the greatest amount of pride about the accomplishments here when?
Hmm.
I don't remember any moment.
I guess it's when they declared a new college and hired Dean Buyers as dean.
Do you remember any key moments of frustration, disappointment?
Yes, when I told Dean Hubert that I felt we'd been stymied for five years and got no answer.
No answer.
Let's see, do you remember any goofy, incredible events, whether they were important or not?
Oh, yes.
Yes, sure.
Share some of those anecdotes.
Well, we needed a ship in the beginning.
ONR was sympathetic.
ONR had written a specification of what a ship should be for oceanographic research.
They called us up one day and said, we've got a ship for you.
Come up and get it in North Carolina.
We didn't have a crew.
We didn't have a budget.
But we got the ship.
We brought it around.
What it was was a harbor tug.
Okay, I looked at it and we had it.
I mean, it was brought down here.
It was our ship.
The inside was nothing but engine, nothing but engine.
I looked for laboratory possibilities.
The only possibility was on the bridge where the captain was, and there was hardly room for him.
So, okay, it didn't look too good.
We only went out one day, and just as we got outside into the open water, somebody shouted, man overboard.
Jerry Stein jumped in.
rescued the fellow, pulled him away from the propellers and saved him.
That fellow couldn't swim.
Somebody hollered, stop the engines.
It was, couldn't stop the engine, it was the engineer that had fallen overboard.
So Don Hood jumped in the water to help support him.
Somehow he got turned around in the back pickup.
But that was the only day we took the Albemarle of the sea.
Within a month or so, the sister ship of Albemarle was working in the Gulf.
I told you it was a harbor dog.
Turned over and sank in three minutes.
That was one incident I remember.
And of course there are a number of other, I told you about the drill press we got from her.
And I have a list of some of those things there.
Let's see.
You never had any break-ins, thievery, fires of great problems?
No natural disasters of great problems?
Well, no natural disasters.
I remember once when we had a converted minesweeper for research and we were out in the Atlantic.
near Bermuda, and the BT, which I mentioned is an instrument you lower over the side to measure temperature, and you do that as you go along.
Well, the BT caught on a rock somehow.
It tightened the wire and broke the wire, and the boom, which hold it, swung around and hit a man on the side of the head, and it was pretty serious.
Tom Harrington's son was along.
He was a pre-medical student.
And he helped with the first aid, and we were within a half a mile of being ashore in Bermuda before there's a hospital.
And I look back now and think, well, nowadays we'd be sued for something like that.
As you recall, some of your own students, your graduate students, where are some of them now?
Who are some that you're most proud to claim?
Well, I usually took the ones that had some kind of a question with other sponsors.
One was Don Walsh.
I had a letter from him a week or so ago.
He was the fellow who went to the bottom of the ocean in the bathyscap long ago.
If he were offered a scholarship of just a couple hundred dollars, the Navy would support his entire program, and he came for a master's and for a doctor's, and he got that.
He is still a consultant in international affairs, and right this week he's working in the Azores, and he's diving in a Russian manned submersible and working at depths of 2,500 meters.
So he was one of the unusual students that I accepted.
Archie Kahan was another one.
Archie just wasn't too much interested in academic work, but a degree would be very useful to him as administrator.
So we worked out something and he got his degree.
The ones I'm most proud of, I think,
Jim O'Brien actually wasn't my student, but I gave him my first scholarship.
He came from New York.
I took him on his first cruise.
I gave him a research topic, which he blew into an international long-term fare.
And now he's probably the top, one of the top two or three oceanographers, meteorologist combination in the country.
He was quoted this month in the Washington Post, quoted in Time Magazine that just came out.
authority on the El Nino, La Nina, and Hurricanes, Hurricanes development.
So he got his degree under Bob Reed, but I feel a contribution to him and get him on the right road.
And I also feel a contribution to Bob Reed because it allowed him to get in a spot where he could really make use of his capabilities.
Scripps said he should stay at Scripps because they had big piles of data there for him to work on.
Bob Reed did not want big piles of data.
He wanted to work with people and data.
So, yes, I look back all like Warren Thompson, one of our first graduates with a PhD, geological oceanographer.
He's been a friend over the years, became professor at the Naval Postgraduate School, consultant to the state of California on erosion and beach problems.
Charlie Bates, I think of these more as peers rather than students, but we did give them degrees.
Charlie was director of the hydrographic office, civil service.
He was chief scientist of the Coast Guard, wrote several good books.
Maybe I've said that before, I don't know.
Graduated in 1953 very early because they had such good backgrounds to start with, both of them.
And then in meteorology,
Well, let's take engineering.
One thing I'm really proud of is that I gave a talk to the graduating class of engineers, banquet.
Afterwards, a couple of fellows came up.
One was Roy Gall, who was a straight-A student in civil engineering.
He came into oceanography and got a doctorate.
Another was Randy Bloomberg was a straight-A student in electrical engineering, and he came over and got his doctor.
Roy Gall became chief advisor in anti-submarine warfare to the admiral that was running that area.
Randy Bloomberg became a consultant in Houston and was killed in an auto accident some years ago.
So those are some of the things I remember.
Let's see, one of the things I want to be sure and mention
If you have any papers, accumulation of materials, letters, journals, diaries that you ever want to share, please share them with the A&M archives.
I'm glad you said that because I've wondered about this.
I've sort of tested different individuals you notice where they might go.
See, that would be a central place.
They have the staffing.
They have the temperature controls.
and they also have the appropriate services to protect them and to keep them in good order.
And they would arrange them so that they would be most useful to anyone who might want to use them.
So please think of that.
Then let me ask you this question.
goofy question.
Let's make believe that someone gives you a check for one million dollars and there's only one condition.
You must pass that on to Texas A&M, but you get to decide what's to be done with it.
If you had a million dollars that you could give to A&M, what would you want them, what use would you want them to make of that gift?
Well,
That's kind of a difficult decision, but I think what I would do is
make it possible for somebody to use good judgment and how to spend that.
I would not want to tie it up in a single fellowship program or a chair or anything else, but the thing that's missing is flexibility.
Everything you get, you have to write a lot of proposals for and you have to go by a lot of rules to outspend and you're kind of restricted with what you can do.
But like I mentioned, the $5,000 for miscellaneous travel, that was worth more than thousands of other dollars.
It's always amazed me that through the years I could never get $5,000 from the legislature to sponsor thinking.
And here I might say that we did not have an experiment station.
Engineering had an experiment station where they could hire people as researchers.
Agriculture had an experiment station.
Arts and Sciences did not have.
So it was very difficult then to do entrepreneurial type of things.
So I would leave this to the judgment of the dean and the department head who were running the program, pretty much.
I might say, well, I'd like to favor an increase in this Sierra Interaction type of thing.
It's a shame now actually that meteorology, best I can see, has very few people who are studying oceanography.
There was a time when many of the master's graduates in meteorology would come and get their doctorate in oceanography, physical.
That was pretty much because of Professor Reed.
not teaching much anymore.
This may be part of the problem.
But there are a couple of professors in oceanography that could take a meteorologist and do a good thing with him in the joint fields.
So the flexibility, you can't get, that's very hard to get money without too many strings attached.
And I would just point out some directions that would be interested in seeing it encourage and let the department decide how to do it.
I'm looking at my notes and your notes.
What have we omitted?
What do you recall that we should have been talking about that we've not yet covered?
Well, we've done very well and covered a lot of subjects.
Of course, 15 years is a long time, and there are a lot of things going on.